If you don't want to be do you just say the big audio only. Oh, it's totally up to you.
I can just patch it to the audio only. Okay, that's fine.
I've got the whole file.
Audio only.
Okay, so first up
Could you tell me
My name is Mohammed by the way. I come from a
Project called Urban Circle. We're based in the University of South Wales. I'm volunteering here today
with Roy, just to give my time for the
interviews. Could you just give me your place of
your name
and where you are from.
Originally where I'm from. My name is
Zia Ahmed.
I'm from Pakistan.
Could you tell me more about where you're from then. So tell me
whereabouts in Pakistan and what was it like
where you were born. I'm from
Faisalabad and I was born
in a village where my mum's mum lived.
We used to visit there all our
childhood until she was alive.
My dad was a contractor.
So wherever his work when we
was little we travelled with him. We travelled different parts of the country.
When we grown up of the age of going to
colleges we settled down in Faisalabad.
Our village where my dad's lands and everything was near
Faisalabad and my old dad's family
lived there. We were living in
city. I had my
GCSE level education
in Faisalabad. Then
when I went to college it was still in Faisalabad but it
was in city. So I
did internet, FA
Faculty of Arts and then after that I did
a BA.
I'm one of my eight brothers and sisters, big family.
I went to college
obviously we had friends.
We had a very good time, good teachers.
When I finished my education I did just the housework
learn life skills
with my mum. My older sister
I was the second on second place in my
family. My older sister was married then I was the
head of the house like mum gave all responsibilities to
me.
I was doing quite well all of it. My brothers
was all younger. We are three sisters they are older.
Then I have five brothers.
We were teaching them going to
their schools to take care of them. My dad was usually
wherever his work is his projects are he's usually
there. We did whatever was our duty
my duty, take care of the family and mum.
Then
all my aunties uncles was around nearby
we used to visit them their children come to stay with us.
Friends was obviously we have a good time with friends.
After when I was
twenty four I had engagement
he was from here his mum
went to Pakistan and it was arranged
then my husband went there and we met each other
then when I was twenty five I got married
and come to this country and then life start.
Before we get to that because that will be my next
question. What was it like growing up
in Faisalabad? How did it feel? Were you a joyful
kid? Were you responsible?
Elder? Tell me about what it was like growing up.
What fond memories do you have of it?
It was just average family
average lifestyle. Though our parents
tried to provide whatever they can but I can't say
it was a very lavish
life it was just middle class
life. But we enjoy our life
there wasn't any desires of more than what we got.
Whatever they provide us wasn't more than enough
for us.
In those days there not used to be this trend of going for holidays
the holidays was usually visiting grandparents
or aunties or uncles and having a good time with them.
Even my grandmother used to play
with us all the board games and things like that.
Obviously we all brothers
and sisters played with our dolls. Sisters we play with the
dolls and brothers they go out and play
their games. Tell me about the games
you played then. This is actually one of the key questions was about
what did you do to pass the time and have fun?
All girls get together and
it was a different type of we used to play
I don't know what they call it. Draw on the ground.
We say shatapu in our life.
Jump on one throw a stone and then wherever it falls
we jump and hop with one leg and then
two legs and something like that. The other game we used to play
so long time now even forgot
what we used to play. All girls sit in a
circle like a tag game.
They tag one person and then they have to run after that person
and they throw something like we make a roll of the scarf
and walk around slowly, drop behind one girl
and if she feel there is
something behind she have to hold the things and run after other girls
if she forget she didn't feel there is anything behind. The same girl
come and pick and then they hit her. Something like that
and then we used to play with the mud
like stones
I don't know what they call it but we used to play and then
these little board games like snake and ladder
things like that. How about school? Do you remember school and did you have
a joyful class or something you remember from school? Yes, yes
I was in sports as well
I used, I was in school time
I was in all sort of athletics like long jump
I had quite a few
awards in a long jump and I was
playing netball as well. I was in a team
I never went outside but in the college
time I was in a team as well and study wise I was
not very high but
upper high level. I had
good grades in my education
and up to school time I was
on the top level but when I went into college
for FA I had like a first division
and in BA it was a second division
but upper second division
I wanted to study further but parents had no thus enough
and then start teaching. I had a few different
courses in agriculture university in Faisalabad
they used to run in holidays
cooking, cookery courses, baking
so I had quite a few of those courses
just for my own life
My hobby from since I was little was
stitching. When my mom used to go out
to visit someone I just take some clothes
out and cut the clothes. I was very little, I was in fifth
grade and I used to cut them and stitch them and sew them
because when mom is home she won't let me do it. I was so
young but that was my hobby and still the same
it developed. Stitching
embroidery, knitting, these were the things in our times
and there was no internet, no
television when we was quite old. We had television
and used to watch
radio, we used to listen radios. How about traditions and celebrations?
Do you remember traditions you had?
Yes there was traditions about
Eids, we celebrate Eids. It was very
exciting time when we all get ready
for the next day, all our jewellery, clothes and
brother's clothes and everything, clean the house
cook different foods and that was
the main thing
mainly we celebrate with the family
and then visit aunties and uncles and they give money to each
other. That was the, there wasn't many
other traditions like Hindu people have
Indian have many traditions, not many in our peoples
only the weddings like the Mehendi and
then the Shaudi weddings. There wasn't
things like in these days
it was very simple. Weddings were
simple.
Ok then lets talk about travelling. When did you arrive in the UK
and what was the motive? What was the reason to
come over to the UK? Because I
had engagement and my motive was
to come here to get married. Though
I had a wedding ceremony in my country
but I travelled to this country as a fiance because it was more
easier to come as a fiance here on those days
laws change after and then I came here and
the ceremony was here as well.
It was in 79
July 22nd I came here
and how old were you then? I was 25.
So you arrived here when you were 25. Yes. Did you have any, what was your
expectations, what was your anxieties
what were your feelings? I haven't had any anxiety actually
I was so confident. When I arrive
to the airport usually
in those days they call the boy in to have his interview
and then they ask questions and everything
and with me when I came to the airport
nothing happened like that because all other girls who came
in the same flight they were calling them and my husband
and his family was outside and they were waiting for the call
that he will go in and give his interview but they ask everything
from me and I answer them
and then they ask me to sit over there sometime
I was sitting there and I asked where shall I go now
and in the same time they called me for
interpreting for other people's I was doing interpreting for
them perhaps we had a little bonding with those people
and then I asked do I have to sit here all the time now or how long I have to
sit they said no you can go there I go now and they said go through
this way and I was out.
So when you arrived what was the UK like?
You got off the plane and then in the airport you got out the door
very easily by the sounds of it. What did you remember?
When I was one of my dad's friends
was on the airport to receive me with
his family and then we came out and
drive to Newport
it was nice around outside
because weather was good not as
good it was quite cold in those days in October
and when I come to the house though they had
quite now I think it was quite reasonable house
but that time it was too small for me
and I don't know how I felt
but it seems strange everything
was strange
and in what ways was it strange?
Because all people was new to me
I only met his mother before and him
according to the law of this country
I had the nikah on the same time same night
priest was there and close family members was there
and the nikah happened
and I have
I was quite calm that time wasn't anxious or anything
So what were the first six months like then?
If the first meeting was hard what was the first six months like?
Six months yes that was quite different
than the family I come from
and I wasn't expecting because these people when they go
back to Pakistan they flatter a lot
this is there and we got this and we got that
but all I was disappointed
because obviously in your family may be the same
the life is like this perhaps
my husband's family they come from a village for them
they may be a lot but because I had everything
more than these things in my house over there
there wasn't any excitement
about those things which is a basic
household things and like that
So what was the most important thing you had to leave behind then?
Looking back on those six months let's say two in a year
what do you feel you left behind that you really could have missed?
It's the parents and my family
I used to miss my mother because in those days
people wasn't traveling back
very quickly in this state
first time I went back was five years
obviously we missed parents and friends
it's not easy to make when you're staying home
you can't make many friends easily
So okay then let's extend that time first two years
what were the best things and what were the worst things?
My husband was very very
supportive and he wasn't like
making any he never said anything
whatever he is he was very
honest with me
that was the big support for me we lived with the family
and obviously in laws are in laws
they pick on every little things
I'm sleeping late I'm waking up late if we wake up
early it's no good things like that
clean the house do this which we never used to
but I did it all I know we have to do everything
but slowly slowly I learned many things from my mother in law as well
because
then I had my daughter
two years later
but I start working after about
seven eight months I went out and find a job whatever I can
find and I start working
what was it like when you first moved into what was it like?
My in laws house
they had a big reasonable house five bedroom
but the decoration it was
up to living standard better than
normal people who was living here in those days it was better than theirs
they had all facilities like washing machine and
telephone in those days telephone was very few people used to have
a phone in their house because all their my
husband and his brothers they was all in universities
and all that so they knew all these things
and they tried to provide their parents though my father in law
was very illiterate but he was very sensible
and he tried to control everything even if
my sometimes my mother in law she little bit harsh
to me he tried to calm her down and
give us a comfort as well he was very nice and kind person
so everything was sort of okay
So how about culturally food wise
when you arrived here what was the stark
difference did you notice anything or what could you say about that?
Obviously you feel taste and food
different here when you first come
especially milk was
taste different meat was taste different from back home
and slowly slowly we adopt
we used to it water taste was even different
in Mumbai?
I don't know it was taste was different
like from one place to the other if you go
from here to Manchester water taste is different it was similar
it was coming here and it was different to me
and food was totally different taste
What was your first job like? I work in a factory they used to
make a blinds
Tell me more about that job did you enjoy it?
It was a necessity that time coming out of the house
and be independent and I was thinking if
because when I came here my husbands graduation was
after I was here I went to his graduation so he hasn't had any job before
and he
he start working and I start working so I can help each other
we can help each other and buy our own house
something
I was fully support to my husband and he support to me
he never hide anything from me even though sometimes
parents say don't tell this to your wife or anything but he was very honest
he said no I can't do that he was very respectful
to his parents as well but he was very
honest with me and throughout my life he was very supportive
Maintaining links back home what did you do to maintain
connection and the cultural practices what habits did you
inform or what did you do to try and maintain some link with back home?
Write a letter
sometime we make book a call in those days
we have to book a call and talk to my parents
mostly writing letters
What kind of thing did you talk about in your letters?
I never told them if I have a little bit hard time here
I never told my parents anything about that
and I was thinking that's the normal thing it can happen if I was in Pakistan
so I tell them if they can't do anything about it
so those things I never told them
the other things I'm doing this and asking
them how they are doing and that's all
I was writing letters so they feel comfortable about me
So as part of this project the people's collection is the website and has
space for multimedia work as well so it means if you have
original letters or photographs or monuments
or anything like that they can be scanned to place with your story
Do you have anything that may be of interest to preserve for the future?
What type of photograph?
Anything that feels good with your story it's up to you but the idea is it will be professionally
scanned they have professional scanners that come and they do it very high resolution
After I came to this country or before my Pakistan photographs
I think anything is your opinion
I don't have any opinion here it's about if you want to add anything that's beyond audio
and transcription if you want to add anything to your story
so people are doing their wedding photograph or they're doing their picture of their mother
or whoever it may be and we attach it to the story
so when people read or listen they get to see a picture or photograph
It's up to you
I have photographs and I have to dig into it
It's a big box of photographs
I'm going to write photos available question mark so we'll get your contact details
as they go through the process they may call you and say would you like to add something
and they'll book a day where you can bring them in and the professional will come and they set up the cameras
and stuff like that to do high resolution scanners
What would you like to pass on to your children, grandchildren, great great great grandchildren
that would sum up your life here in the UK?
I'd say great great great great great far far away
and they're doing some research and they type the family name in
my great great great great great grandmother lives in Newport
what would you like to say and leave them about you living here?
Yes the best thing I will tell them about the faith
Live the life whichever way they feel comfortable
but don't stop practicing
and your faith
We are Muslim, we should stay Muslim
and die as a Muslim, it doesn't matter
we are Muslim, we should stay Muslim
and die as a Muslim, it doesn't matter how many generations passed
that's the main thing
Is there anything you would like to tell them about the way you lived your life
or how you encouraged them to live their life
as well, the faith is an important part
any morals or principles or cultures or ethos
or philosophies?
Respect parents
and
love and care is the main thing and respect
with their parents and with their
siblings, with their brothers and sisters
family, if they stick with their family, if their family is together
they are stronger
We already had some questions
when did you find out about Age Alive?
About 7 years ago
What has it meant for you?
Coming out of house, seeing more friends, trying to find out more
about the people's lives and share my own experiences
with them
It's very relaxing when you come out of house and talk to people
and share your happiness and whatever happened to you
It's a very supportive group
even if somebody is ill or somebody passed away
they are very supportive
or any happiness, any weddings, any functions, any get togethers
to enjoy
Has it met your expectations?
Yes, it's quite good, it's very good
Anything else you would like to add on the record while we're here?
Those are all my questions, and there were two questions from Roy which was about the project
Anything else you would like to add or share
that you feel the future generations must know about?
Yes, I got my three children
and my daughters are married
they went to university and all that
and they are married and they got their own children now
and my son is still single
he did pharmacy first
then he decided to do medicine
and he is a junior doctor now
My children are very close to each other
that was my aim to brought them up very close
and they are close
they get together, have their good time, and I have good time with them
with my grandchildren, though my grandson is 19 now
and my one granddaughter is 16
and my two grandsons are 7 and 3
and we have good time together when they come over
and I will advise them to stay together
though they live in their own lives
but stick together and have a good time
that's the main values
respect each other
this is what I would expect from them
Thank you very much for your time